---
title: Toptal
date: 2015-08-09
template: post.html
collection: posts
---
Programmers, we need to talk about recruiters. Our jobs are supposed to be among the fastest growing, we are in high demand. Yet, we are faced with looking for jobs on job boards, use recruiters or network. Many of us develop our technical skills and skip the softer skills so networking is *out of the question*. Well then, we can make use of people that should look for jobs on our behalf. But their performance is almost universally dreadful.

No longer can people in our industry rely on the standard metric of a university degree. That matters very little in the creative industries of today. Instead we turn to platforms like GitHub or personal blogs to present our work. But many of us have been *burdened* by corporate work and NDAs up the wazoo. If we are in such a demand why do we *have* to work extra hours after work on something else to show?

And in either case, the standrad workflow still is sending a CV and a cover letter to a prospective company. A very inefficient way to introduce yourself.

Enter Toptal. Just like a red brick university that draws bright students, their whole premise is to create a clique for developers that are *good*. And that's it. And the timing could not be more perfect. Many of the top tech companies in the world now understand that sourcing their talent from a local pool is limiting their potential. They do get many applicants, but going through all of them takes valuable time. In the meantime, quality developers are getting offers elsewhere. On the other side of the equation we, as tech people, build more and more tools to make it easy to be away from the cubicle and work remotely. And so Toptal can serve a large community of good programmers to a large community of good companies, they need not reduce their standards to make a quick buck.

A brilliant example of a business sprung up from the need to evaluate job seekers and their abilities now that credentialing of yesteryear is not working as a measure of how *good* a programmer is. Next step? We can imagine Toptal joining hands with an education bootcamp thus skipping both the traditional tertiary education and recruiting industry in one swat, now there's a disruption.

So go ahead and apply to get that Toptal *badge*, it's way cheaper than getting a degree through Stanford.

In fact, this system could be completely self sustaining where developers could write content or interview potential candidates to get expert badges and show higher up in the rankings. Well then it would be just like GitHub, developers spending their free time to compete among themselves to prove they are skilled. Thus we have to stop at some point and ask how much showcase of effort is "good enough". Otherwise we could spend people's spare brain cycles to compete among themselves rather than doing actual work. Just because someone would be capable of putting in these extra hours, doesn't mean we should let them. And thus one could come up with a code of "ethics" of the new recruiter: if you make people jump through hoops, make them jump only as far as you need them to to determine their ability, and not higher. Leave the actual athletic effort for the work itself.

And if you are more of the design persuasion, head over to [Dezigner](http://dezigner.io/) that will be launching soon.

The easy at which a company like Toptal can launch means that anyone could become an incumbent if Toptal strayed. Something which is good for the industry. Everything else is easy to copy, only reputation is the "know how" of a company like Toptal. They can be unseated and replaced.